---
layout: post 
title: "The Future of Meaningful Work"
date: 2017-10-14
comments: true
---

I have both a short-term/selfish reason and a long-term/altruistic reason for my interest in machine learning (ML). This post is about my long-term/altruistic reason.

As more of the world becomes “developed”, humanity will want less and less for its basic needs (food/water, protection from disease/war) and suffer more and more from what we might call “first-world” problems.

The core symptom of first-world problems is persistent unhappiness. Many people in the United States today are persistently miserable, despite the fact that their basic needs are consistently met. While this might sound baffling and even frivolous to someone who has, say, escaped extreme poverty, famine, or violence, profound unhappiness is a very real facet of the lives of millions of people in the developed world.

While there may be many reasons for this malaise (increasing loneliness, widespread substance dependence), I suspect that a big component of first-world misery is dissatisfaction with career and work. Americans are working longer hours than ever before, but real wages have stagnated. Many Americans don’t see a path to doing or finding work they see as meaningful and rewarding.

We spend at least a third of our entire lives, and more than half of our waking lives, at work. While work may not be everything, it is a huge facet of our existence.

If creative license, autonomy, and purpose (“this job is more than just about me”) are the universal qualities that make work meaningful, then their negatives - repetition, inflexibility, and lack of purpose - are the qualities that define unpleasant and even soul-crushing work. 

Millions of Americans work in jobs that are repetitive, inflexible, and difficult to connect to a higher purpose. Incidentally, machine intelligence excels in tasks that are well-defined, resource-intensive (in time/energy), and… highly repetitive.

As machine learning technologies reach fruition, the range of occupations in which machines will overtake humans will grow. The first jobs to go will be: customer support, low-level legal/administrative work, and repetitive and strenuous physical tasks (e.g. factory work, shipping/delivery).

The most automatable "white-collar" professions will follow. Entry-level investment banking jobs will involve to a greater and greater extent the use of AI - to extract company financials, run basic regressions, build spreadsheets and pitch decks - and less and less the use of naive, overworked recent college graduates.

As machines specialize to do work that is well-defined, repetitive, and resource-intensive, humans will specialize to do work that is creative, complex, and people-oriented.

The first-order (and the best-understood) effect will be that millions will be forced out of newly-defunct occupations. But this will incentivize re-education programs…