---
layout: post
title: "Being Happy"
date: 2021-10-03
comments: true
---

2021 has been one of the happiest years on record for me, and I want to share a post deep-diving into what happened. One important thing to note is that I achieved nothing of particular professional significance this year. (In contrast, in 2020, I helped my team launch a new business line for my company, and was accepted to two of the top PhD programs in my field, but still spent much of the year in an unhappy and/or stressed state.)

Unfortunately, the truth isn't as simple as "professional success does not matter to personal well-being". I am of the opinion that external scorecards do matter, but that internal scorecards matter *just as much*.

Here's what I did (or thought about) in 2021 that made me happy:

### Reading

I've read seven books so far in 2021, which is more than any year in recent memory. I read these books because I wanted to, not because I had to, and because I was interested enough in them to finish them. (I also left several books unfinished.)

These books spanned the gamut from self-help to law, finance, behavioral genetics, business, microeconomics, comedy/celebrity gossip, and philosophy.

When it comes to reading, I've found that there are two important things: (1) follow your curiosity and (2) actually finish books from time to time. The feeling of accomplishment your experience when you finish reading a well-written book that actually teaches you something is unparalleled, and is a high that I consciously chase as often as I can.

Reading a single-digit number of books in 2021 isn't anything worth writing home about, but is a personal milestone that I'm very proud of.

### Friendships

Prior to 2021, my perspective on friends was that friendship was just something that happened. I'd use passive voice to describe friendships: "I became friends with this person" or "I became not-friends with this person". And for the most part, I would let circumstances dictate the frequency with which I kept in contact with my friends.

Unfortunately, this is not a very good way to maintain casual relationships. In 2021, I decided to become more proactive about maintaining my friendships. In particular, I set up *regular video calls* with my closest friends, which we've all come to immensely enjoy (I think). To clarify, I have actual recurring calendar events reminding me when I need to speak with each friend group, and Google Meet invites to facilitate the calls.

After a brief scare in 2020 in which I thought I had lost all my friends, I am now happily in touch with about six close friends on a regular basis (and more casually in touch with many more people). Several of these people live in different states.

As many people realized in the pandemic, friendships and human connection rank near the top among foundational requirements for a happy and vibrant life.

### Exercise

After some on-and-off experiments with more intensive forms of exercise over the years (including weight lifting), I've settled on a maintainable routine that involves going for a walk at least once a day, each day of the week.

When it comes to exercise, I am of the belief that consistency is more important than intensity. Your mileage might vary.

Walks for me combine three good things: (1) baseline physical exertion, (2) time outside, in nature, and (3) time to disconnect and reflect.

### Learning

After graduating college, I convinced myself of the weird lie that I didn't really care about learning. I subscribed to the school of thought that says: "You can spend all lifetime learning and preparing. It's doing that counts."

This turns out to be a totally false and terrible school of thought.

If the idea of "learning" makes you shudder or recoil in disgust, I think I know your problem: you associate learning with "required and/or beneficial knowledge for my career path" (or: "things my boss wants me to know"). I mean learning in a much broader sense: intellectual stimulation.

I think any functioning human brain desires stimulation, and learning is one way your brain achieves it.

For me, reading forms a big part of my learning routine, but I also spent a few months in 2021 completing a college course on a foundational topic for my work. I love the area, so it was a fun experience, but the act of actually completing the class (24 lectures, 7 homeworks, 2 exams) was also a major personal milestone for me.

### Driving

I took driver's ed in high school, and got my driver's license when I was 18, but I am embarrassed to admit that I didn't *really* learn to drive until this year. (This is one of the downsides of 1) living in places with good public transport and 2) the existence of Uber.)

I have been driving a ton in 2021, and loving it. Driving for me represents independence, mobility, and agency. I'm also getting my first car soon, and am excited about that too.

### Money

I hesitate to write this, but I have been surprised to discover that money has an important part to play in happiness as well.

Having money to me means, first and foremost, freedom. More subtly, it means the freedom to be more authentic in professional settings, and to stand up for yourself when needed. (If you have enough savings to cover X years of living expenses, then you don't need to put up with consistently un-fun situations.)

While you can always have doubts about how well your life is going, the number of years of living expenses you've saved (given cost-of-living assumptions) is an objective source of security in a world in which there are very few guarantees.

### Mentors

In 2021, I made a point to cultivate relationships with several mentors. Again, like friendships, I'd previously relegated this to the "as-needed" bucket, which doesn't really work.

I now have one main mentor who I try to email once every few months, and who I respect and trust (and who respects me - important!), and several other more casual mentors.

Being in touch with mentors makes me feel like I'm being deliberate about my career, and that I have professional allies.

### Emotions

This is a topic that probably deserves its own post.

Everyone has their own ways of dealing with their emotions. Some people bury their emotions, others live them out. Some people listen to their emotions intently, others ignore them. Most people fall somewhere in between these extremes.

While I won't take a side on any emotional psychology debates, I have three main learnings from the past few years:

(1) *Emotions aren't a record of objective reality* - I can be feeling down (sad, unenergetic) one day, and happy the next, even when nothing of substance has changed in my life. This suggests that we should be careful about attributing too much meaning to our emotional state, especially negative emotions.

(2) *Emotions must be managed* - Being stressed, sad, angry, pessimistic, anxious, or fearful aren't normal states, and if you feel any of these emotions (stress, sadness, anger, hopelessness, anxiety, fear) welling up, you should address them head on (a.k.a.: right away). It's not OK to let yourself be sad or stressed for long periods of time, and you shouldn't feel bad about prioritizing your well-being over other things (especially externally-mandated things). In particular, if you're coming out of a rough patch, it's OK to prioritize just being happy and content. Do this before you begin to take on more responsibility again.

(3) *Being happy is a skill* - You can learn how to cultivate happiness. Often this involves making time for the things you love, and discarding the things you don't love (to the extent that you can). I've also learned that there is little downside to *always being happy*. Don't trick yourself into thinking that happiness comes at a cost.



