---
layout: post
title: "On Facebook"
date: 2017-10-02
comments: true
---

What is Facebook's core innovation?

Facebook recently [changed](https://techcrunch.com/2017/06/22/bring-the-world-closer-together/) its mission statement from “Making the world more open and connected” to “Give people the power to build community and bring the world closer together.” I believe this new statement actually gets closer to Facebook's core technological contribution, but I want to further unpack these ideas.

**A thought experiment**: What would happen if Facebook (including Messenger, Instagram, and WhatsApp) disappeared today, for a year? Would the world become more closed, and less connected? Would people lose contact with their closest friends and family? Would people become lonelier? Or would they just turn to Facebook's closest substitutes - email, phone calls, and text messaging - and make do just fine?

The answer to these questions may not be clear cut. The assumption that I want to question in particular is that Facebook makes the world "more connected", in part because it is not clear what "connected" means, and in part because it is not clear that its predecessors and substitutes are insufficient for that purpose.

So what *does* Facebook do?

A brief aside: why does this question even matter? Here's why *I* think it does: the broader understanding of why Facebook succeeded as a service is muddled. People acknowledge that Facebook wasn't the first social network - both Friendster (2002) and Myspace (2003) already existed. But, as the story goes, Facebook came in "at just the right time, at just the right place." And they got profile privacy right. This explanation to me is unsatisfactory.

In particular, Peter Thiel's thesis is that all great businesses must build one of two kinds of products:

1) **0 to 1 systems.** These are products that are the first in their kind - not derivatives of existing ideas (e.g. Uber vs. Uber for pet sitting).
2) **10x systems.** These are products that are at least an order of magnitude better than whatever is used instead today (e.g. [Google search](http://ilpubs.stanford.edu:8090/361/1/1998-8.pdf) vs. Yahoo/Alta Vista).

Of course, these categorizations are slightly subjective, and the 10x figure slightly arbitrary. The point is: businesses must build something that is either novel and incredibly compelling (e.g. the iPhone), or radically better than existing solutions (e.g. Docker containers vs. virtual machines), or people won't switch over from whatever they use, or do, instead.

In fact, these properties are related. While on-demand ride hailing was a novel concept in itself, Uber also reduced waiting times by ten-fold, from e.g. 20 minutes to 2 minutes.

So which category does Facebook fall in? Early Facebook wasn't commended for its page load times (as Google was), or for its innovations in cross-device file syncing (as Dropbox was). But if Friendster and Myspace already existed, creating "another social network" wasn't exactly a novel and compelling proposition either, right?

<!-- Facebook wasn't a technological advance over some slow, crusty predecessor social network. -->

**Thesis**: Facebook is a service that allows anyone in the world to set up a semi-public personal blog, and selectively share it with their friends and family. Over the last ten years, it has expanded in scope. Today Facebook is both 1) a personal blogging tool (Facebook proper, Instagram), and 2) a personal communication tool (Messenger, WhatsApp).

Consider the following: before Facebook, to set up a personal page on the Internet, one had to actually string together a *website*. This involves:

1) buying a domain name
2) finding a web hosting service
3) writing code (HTML/CSS) to display some initial text
4) deploying that code, either by manually uploading the individual files (via a web GUI) or pushing it to a server (via the command line), to the hosting service
5) distributing the site URL to friends and family 
6) repeating steps 3-4 to keep the page updated (e.g. adding photos/videos, status updates)
7) pinging your connections to inform them about updates

How Facebook handles this for you:

1) Facebook assigns unique paths under its own domain name to its users, e.g. https://www.facebook.com/zuck.
2) Facebook hosts your content on its own servers.
3) Facebook uses pre-defined templates to generate a basic profile for all users.
4) Facebook enables users to publish a profile via a web GUI-based account creation process.
5) Facebook allows you to add "recommended friends", a group that includes:
	- people whose email address you possess in your e.g. Gmail or Hotmail contacts[^1]
	- people with whom who share mutual friends
6) Facebook enables profile updates via its web GUI
7) Facebook automatically sends updates to your connections through its "news feed"

[^1]: Bulk-uploading your email contacts (after getting you to approve the action) was an early growth-hacking trick that Facebook used to learn a rudimentary social graph for new users. Google eventually caught on, and [blocked](https://searchenginewatch.com/sew/news/2050429/google-block-facebooks-access-gmail-contacts) this feature.

<!-- In more  detail:

1) Facebook assigns unique paths under its own domain name (https://www.facebook.com/) to its users, e.g. https://www.facebook.com/zuck. *This is now a staple practice among all social sites with user profiles.*
2) Facebook hosts your content on its own servers, including your basic profile information, your photos and videos, your status updates, your relational data (connections, likes, etc.), and much more on its own servers.
3)  -->




